Therapist: Hi. Good to see you again.
Client: Hi.
Therapist: Can I take a look at your scores?
Client: Sure.
Therapist: While I'm looking at these, just tell me, in your own words, how you've been fe e ling this week.
Client: Well, I would say I think a little bit better. I don't know if I know exactly why, but I feel a little bit better.
Client: When I woke up in the morning, I was able to get up more easily. I think that when I was just reading the paper, even the sports section, I felt like I was able to concentrate a little better.
Therapist: Oh, that's wonderful. I'm really glad to hear that. It looks like you're sleeping better too?
Client: Well, I think that what I meant by that was mostly that I didn't oversleep.
Therapist: Okay.
Client: Because I had been spending a lot of time in bed. I would say I got up at 7:00a.m., but I didn't really get up at 7:00a.m.
Therapist: Oh, that's great. That's great. Looks like  your concentration on things, like reading the newspaper, you said, that's a little better， too ?
Client: Yeah.
Therapist: Oh, I'm really glad. You said you don't have any idea as to why you're feeling better ?
Client: Maybe that's not entirely fair. Maybe it's because of the things that we're doing here that are helping.
Therapist: Oh, that's great. We'll get to those things in just a minute, but let's set the agenda. What would be your goal for today's session?
Client: Well, I guess to start thinking about working on the things that make it difficult for me to do things to get better. Like we talked about going out and doing things. And last time we talked about what I would like to be doing, like by Labor Day.
Therapist: What's something that you would like to be able to do, but you've been having trouble doing? With something, either going out, or in the apartment.
Client: Well, it's kind of like the evenings are really hard for me because even if I go out and do something, then at the end of the day, I go back 
Therapist: Good, okay, so we'll try to get to evenings. Anything else ? Any other goals you have ?
Client: I would say that that's probably the main thing. Well, I should do something about my apartment. I don't keep after that like I should.
Therapist: You want to get your apartment in better order?
Client: Yeah.
Therapist: Okay.
Client: But that seems like such a big job. I don't know where to start.
Therapist: Well, maybe we could figure out together where to start.
Client: Okay.
Therapist: That sounds good. So, we're setting the agenda. I'd also like to talk a little bit more about the depressing thoughts that you've been having, and talk some more about credit, if that's okay.
Client: Okay.
Therapist: What I'd like to do next is just to turn to the notes from, actually, from the evaluation, and then the notes from last session.
Client: Okay.
Therapist: If it's all right, I'll just read this and I'd like you to tell me what you think about this now. "When I start to feel more depressed, remind myself that the therapy plan makes sense." Does it still make sense to you?
Client: Yes, it does.
Therapist: "With Therapist's help, I'll be working toward goals every week, step by step. I'll learn how to evaluate my thinking, which might be 100 percent true, or zero percent true, or someplace in the middle." What do you think about that?
Client: Well, I think the idea of working toward goals every week is a good idea. I think that your helping me to figure out what those things are is good. If I evaluate my thinking, which may be 100 percent, or not, or somewhere in the middle -
Therapist: We really haven't done that yet; We've just been identifying your thinking. But does it make sense to you that you might still be seeing the world through black glasses?
Client: Mostly.
Therapist: Yes. Not all your thoughts are 100 percent true.
Client: I think most of my thoughts are, but when I go out and do things, then I feel better when I'm doing them.
Therapist: That's terrific .
Client: I don't have as many black dots now.
Therapist: Yes. It sounds like this next part is true, then "The way I'll feel better is by making small changes in my thinking and behavior every day" ?
Client: Ye ah.
Therapist: Excellent. We covered it just a little bit last session, so I want to talk about it more this session. "Give myself credit for doing things on the Action Plan, for doing anything else that helps me get over the depression, and for anything that's even a little bit difficult, but I do it anyway." Were you any better at giving yourself credit this week?
Client: I think so. Last week, I hadn't really done that much that I really felt that I deserved any credit. But I tried to push myself this week and do the things we talked about, so yeah. I was better because I was able to recognize that.
Therapist: That's great.
Client: I was pushing myself and doing it.
Therapist: In a few minutes, maybe we'll talk about keeping a credit list, so we'll get to that, too.
Therapist: Okay. So, again, what was the best part of this past week? Or, when did you feel the best? When were you at your best?
Client: Well, all of the things, just going out for a walk is better than sitting on the couch. But I went out with my grandson again, and that was good.
Therapist: Ethan again?
Client: Ethan.
Therapist: What did you do with him?
Client: We just went out and got ice cream again.
Therapist: Vanilla?
Client: I tried a different flavor this time .
Therapist: Did you? What did you try?
Client: It was a chocolate swirl thing. It was different.
Therapist: Which do you like better? The vanilla the week before?
Client: I don't know. About the same. I like trying something new.
Therapist: Good for you. So, you were at your best when you took Ethan for ice cream again?
Client: Yeah.
Therapist: What was good about taking him for icecream?
Client: I think it's just fun to be with him and just talk about stuff, and to feel kind of like a normal person.
Therapist: Yeah. So, you felt less depressed when you were out with him?
Client: Ye ah.
Therapist: Yeah. That's good. Does that imply that actually you might be able to do things that can help you feel better?
Client: I guess so.
Therapist: Was it easy to go out with him, or was it still hard?
Client: It was easier than the first time. It was a lot easier than the first time .
Therapist: Oh, good. I'm glad.
Client: I still have some questions, but it was a lot easier.
Therapist: If it was easier, it makes me think that your thinking must have been different. What were you thinking when you were getting ready to go out with him?
Client: I was thinking, "Well, last time went pretty good, so, no reason to think that this time won't be good too." So, I was just sort of more able to look forward to it as I was going to do it.
Therapist: That's terrific .
: T his time you were making a  positive prediction and your mood was better ?
Client: Yeah.
Therapist: And it made  it easier to go out.
Client: Yeah.
Therapist: Okay. I want to just get back to the therapy notes from last week, too. Were you able to read these every day?
Client: I did, yeah. I read it every day.
Therapist: Were you able to pull them out any other times during the day? I'm not sure we even asked you to do that.
Client: After I got up in the morning and took a shower and s tuff, I would read it.
Therapist: Right, right. Okay. So, tell me what you think of this "When I criticize myself, remember, I'm only looking at part of the scene, and it's through black glasses. Judy says it's not my fault. It's happening because I have depression."
Client: I think that there's some truth to that.
Therapist: Uh - huh. Do you think you're accepting this fact more, that you do have a real illness? Last week, I think it was a hard thing to even think about.
Client: I think that was the first time that I really thought about it in that way. When you went down and read the list of things to me, I could say, "Yeah, that's me."
Therapist: That's you.
Client: So, I think that it's in a book, it must mean something.
Therapist: Yeah. Are you thinking now that your condition is more like pneumonia?
Client: I guess so.
Therapist: Something that happens that has these really negative symptoms, makes everything harder ?
Client: Yeah.
Therapist: Then we talked about, last week, about how your thinking influences how you feel and what you do. Were you able to catch any of those automatic thoughts this week? I don't think I even called them automatic. They're just your depressed thoughts.
Client: Just my thoughts. Yeah.
Therapist: Did you catch any this week?
Client: Yeah. I guess the worst one was like when I said that sitting on the couch is hard, so when I was sitting there, there would be times when I would think that I'm not going to get better.
Therapist: Uh - huh. When you had that thought, how did that make you feel?
Client: Bad.
Therapist: Were you able to remind yourself at all that just because you think something, doesn't necessarily mean it's true?
Client: Yeah, I did. I can't say I believe that 100 percent, but I believe it more than I did in the beginning.
Therapist: Okay. That's good.
Client: Then, probably in my weaker moments, I said, "This isn't going to work."
Therapist: Uh - huh. Meaning this therapy?
Client: This therapy and all that. So, I went out and had ice cream with my grandson. [expressing additional automatic thoughts] Well, I ought to be doing that anyway. I went for a walk. Well, I ought to be doing that anyway.
Therapist: So, you got re ally self - critical?
Client: Yeah.
Therapist: Yeah. All right. I think I'll come back to the rest of the Action Plan in a few minutes.